Seeds of Words and Their Meanings: An Unmistaken Presentation of the View Expounded by the Venerable Founding Masters of the Sakya Tradition Namo gurubhyaḥ! According to the Precious Oral Instructions on the Path Including the Result and other teachings transmitted by the Great and Glorious Sakyapa, the manner in which the view is expounded can be condensed into two approaches: (1) the view of the middle way taught in the context of the instructions on the three perceptions and (2) the section on the pristine wisdom of mahāmudrā taught in the context of the instructions on the three continua. I. The View of the Middle Way The view of the middle way includes the pith instructions of Ārya Nāgārjuna and those of the Protector Maitreya. A. The Pith Instruction of Ārya Nāgārjuna Ācārya Āryadeva states: First, turn away from what is unwholesome, In the middle, negate the self, And in the end, overturn all foundations for views- Those who understand this are wise indeed. This means that, at the beginning, renunciation is generated based on impure perception, followed by the cultivation of love, compassion, and relative bodhicitta from among [the practices related to] the perception of experience. Turning away from unwholesome deeds through these means, one is established at the level of higher rebirth. In the middle, at the time of cultivating ultimate bodhicitta, belief in the self is negated by cutting elaborations of apprehending things as truly existent. This establishes one in the ground of liberation. Furthermore, one identifies belief in true existence in terms of apprehending the five skandhas of one's own continuum as truly existent. If these skandhas were truly existent, they would have to exist primordially, independent of causes and conditions. However, as they exist only due to causes and conditions, they are not truly existent. Establish this reasoning with certainty until you truly understand it. Then, as a first step, through focused concentration on this view, defeat thoughts that cling to true existence. In the middle, relax the mind into the view of the lack of true existence. Finally, alternate between these two or remain in the natural state-without losing awareness of the view, being free of thoughts and completely open, as if awestruck. Having gained trust in this, all phenomena are released into the lack of true existence. At this point, one enters the state of union by suffusing the previously generated state of calm abiding with the view by means of its key points. In the end, since karma and mental afflictions have their origin in thoughts apprehending things as truly existent, which in turn comes from conceptual elaborations or clinging to signs, the foundation of the view that sees things as not truly existent is negated as well. When this is embraced with skillful means, there arises the pristine wisdom of omniscience. That being so, rather than continually bringing forth the certainty that all phenomena lack inherent existence through the key points of dependent arising, one should ascertain that the object-emptiness-is not something to be apprehended in any way as "existent" or "nonexistent," and so forth, because it is not the domain of the dualistic mind. Having gained certainty in this understanding, unsullied by elaborations related to objects of the mind, all conceptual views are relinquished and one rests in a state of utter equality, not grasping at anything. Therefore, Lord Mañjuśrī stated: "If there is grasping, it is not the view." This indicates the relinquishment of clinging to true existence in the middle stage of the cultivation of the view and the elimination of clinging to signs in its final stage. B. The Pith Instruction of the Protector Maitreya Natural luminosity free of elaborations at the time of the ground is the cause of both saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. When it is not recognized for what it is, it dawns as the duality of apprehended objects and an apprehending subject. Since the manifest affliction of this dualistic perception along with its dormant latencies is innate ignorance, the root of saṃsāra, its source must be cut and dissolved into the ultimate expanse. This has two aspects: cutting the deluded perception of apprehended objects and cutting the deluded perception of an apprehending subject. 1. CUTTING THE DELUDED PERCEPTION OF APPREHENDED OBJECTS The first aspect requires three steps: seeking the samādhi that achieves perception at the level of heat, seeking the samādhi of enhanced perception at the level of peak, and seeking the samādhi that realizes the nonexistence of the apprehended at the level of forbearance. Regarding the first, free of the duality of apprehended and apprehender and beyond all limitations of conceptual elaboration, self-cognizant pristine wisdom resides within one's own mind stream. However, because it is obscured by grasping at "external phenomena" as separate from one's mind, this notion must be eliminated. The way to do this is to first determine that these objects are nothing but the mind's deluded perceptions-in reality, not even a single particle truly exists separate from mind-and then to bring about an experience of this reality. In this way, one gains certainty in the understanding that "external phenomena" are nothing but mental delusions in reality devoid of true existence. Thus, clear perception arises to a small degree. Second, by greatly enhancing this clear perception, the experience becomes exceptionally clear. Third, by continuing to exert oneself in this way, the manifest deluded perceptions of apprehended objects that veil one's mind stream are purified and there arises an extraordinarily bright and blissful clear perception of the mind. Even though deluded perceptions of the inner apprehending mind have not subsided at this point, since deluded perceptions of externally apprehended objects have ceased and there is not the slightest clinging to them as truly existent, it is also called the samādhi that achieves perception. 2. CUTTING THE DELUDED PERCEPTION OF AN APPREHENDING SUBJECT Through sustained effort, the deluded perceptions of the inner apprehending mind fade out as well, and a powerful clear perception of the luminosity of one's mind shines forth. This experience is similar to directly seeing [the nature of mind]. This is the unobstructed samādhi at the level of supreme worldly phenomena. Even though innate ignorance is not yet purified, the luminosity experienced at this point is purified of the majority of the manifest deluded perceptions of duality that arise from that ignorance. With this samādhi, the path of seeing is accomplished without interruption and with ease. Through further perseverance, even though the dormant latencies of innate ignorance-namely, the ground of the elaborations of the duality of apprehended and apprehender-are not yet purified, innate ignorance in its manifest state is. With the arising of clear perception and pristine wisdom, one sees the bare and vivid pristine wisdom that is self-cognizant and self-illuminating. After the manifest deluded perceptions related to the experiences of perception, enhancement, and achievement have faded away and their counteragents, the clear perceptions of the experiences of perception, enhancement, and achievement, have gradually unfolded, the coarse aspect of manifest innate ignorance ceases as well, and one has the experience of great luminosity at the level of supreme worldly phenomena. The completion of this cultivation, directly seeing the aspect purified of innate ignorance, together with its dormant latencies, is the first bhūmi. Then, the various aspects of ignorance that obstruct the ten bhūmis are gradually purified, enhancing this clear perception. On the eleventh bhūmi, the level of buddhahood, the luminosity that is endowed with the twofold purity and is beyond the objects of the mind is directly seen. II. The Pristine Wisdom of Mahāmudrā Regarding the pristine wisdom of mahāmudrā taught in the context of the instructions on the three continua: after the bestowal of the empowerment, the view of the indivisibility of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa is first introduced and then experientially integrated. This consists of four points: (1) searching for the mind, the ground of experience; (2) introducing it as the union of luminosity and emptiness; (3) establishing that itself as the fundamental, innate pristine wisdom; and (4) experientially integrating its meaning through meditative cultivation. A. Searching for the Mind, the Ground of Experience At first, one directs the cognitive awareness inward to analyze and examine the mind in detail with such questions as: Where is my mind? What does it look like? Does it have a color or a shape? B. Introducing It as the Union of Luminosity and Emptiness Even though no certainty is gained by investigating the mind in this way, at the conventional level one identifies the mind as mere unceasing, luminous awareness and there dawns to a small degree the experience of its self-arising from within. This is the understanding of one of the three properties of the mind, referred to as "luminosity, the characteristic of the mind." By investigating its essential nature, one gains certainty with regard to its emptiness, free of the three aspects of arising, ceasing, and abiding. This is the understanding of the second of the mind's three properties, referred to as "emptiness, the nature of the mind." Thus, when there is a conceptual experience, one finds that it is mere luminous awareness, which, rather than a nihilistic emptiness, can appear as anything whatsoever. Looking at its essential nature, one determines it to be emptiness because no intrinsic nature whatsoever can be apprehended. These two aspects being inseparable, it is empty while being luminous: the nature of mind is emptiness and the movement of that which investigates emptiness is luminosity. And it is luminous while being empty: from within its empty nature, luminosity naturally manifests. Determining that luminosity and emptiness are in union is called "reaching decisive certainty with regard to union." When a genuine experience of this dawns, rather than mere theoretical understanding, whatever appears is experienced as the play of the indivisibility of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. This is the understanding of the properties of the mind in their entirety, the union of luminosity and emptiness, called "the uncontrived essential nature of the mind." C. Establishing It as the Fundamental, Innate Pristine Wisdom By introducing the fundamental, innate pristine wisdom, this pristine wisdom is identified as neither one's mind in a mere general sense nor the mind characterized by deluded perceptions. Instead, it is posited as the unmistaken union of luminosity and emptiness at the time of the ground. Many names are given to it in the sūtras and tantras, including "buddha nature," "mind of complete purity," "mind of natural luminosity," "mind vajra," and so forth. It is also called the "causal continuum of the universal ground." The innate deluded mind that arises in one's mind stream is adventitious saṃsāra; this is the object to be purified. One may wonder, "How so?" Even though innate pristine wisdom is the nature of the adventitious mind that is saṃsāra, and has been closely associated with it since beginningless time, it has not yet been recognized. The innate pristine wisdom is nirvāṇa. Even though these two are designated as distinct aspects, they cannot be differentiated from the perspective of their essential nature. This is called "the view of the indivisibility of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa at the time of the cause." Resting in equipoise in the recognized pristine wisdom free of the duality of apprehended and apprehender, the union of luminosity and emptiness of one's mind is called "the view of the indivisibility of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa at the time of the path." D. Experience through Familiarization Meditative cultivation requires that one stabilize and enhance the view based on three key points. 1. ESTABLISHING APPEARING OBJECTS AS MIND The view that all externally appearing objects are but deluded perceptions, stirred up by the karmic latencies present in one's own mind and devoid of true existence, is established by means of scriptural quotations and examples. Through meditative cultivation, one gains decisive certainty that appearing objects are mind. One then settles in this view, without clinging, in a state of clear and unsullied awareness. By understanding in this way that external objects are not real, one's view is similar to that of the True Images Mind-Only school. In this way, one's view is enhanced by relying on the aspect of natural luminosity. 2. ESTABLISHING MENTAL PERCEPTIONS AS ILLUSIONS By establishing with scriptural quotations and examples the notion that external apprehended objects are deluded perceptions contrived by the deluded apprehending mind, and that just as there are no apprehended objects there is no apprehending mind either, [the understanding of] the empty aspect of the mind is stabilized and enhanced. However, even though one understands that the deluded duality of apprehended and apprehender is devoid of true existence, this view is still similar to that of the False Images Mind-Only school, because empty luminosity, which is neither the apprehended nor the apprehender, is held to be truly existent. 3. ESTABLISHING THE ILLUSORY AS DEVOID OF INHERENT NATURE One may wonder, "Even though all apprehended objects and apprehending subjects are not real, might there be some substance other than them that truly exists?" In order to show that that substance too is devoid of inherent existence, there are two points: establishing it as dependently arising and as inexpressible. 1.1 Establishing All Phenomena as Dependently Arising Compounded phenomena are not truly existent, due to their dependent nature. Uncompounded phenomena are either posited in relation to compounded phenomena or the term "uncompounded" is given in relation to the compounded phenomena's aspect of lack of true existence. Apart from this, no truly existent uncompounded phenomena are seen. As stated by Nāgārjuna: If the compounded is not existent at all, How could the uncompounded exist? To establish in this way through scriptural quotations and examples-both being based on the reasoning of dependent arising-that all phenomena are devoid of inherent existence is the understanding of the wondrous path of the middle way, free from the extremes of eternalism and nihilism. This is referred to as "the view equal to that of the Perfection Vehicle." Thus, misconceptions are eliminated by means of hearing and reflection. The meditative experience of emptiness of true existence is also experienced in union with the luminosity of the fundamental mind. This is the indivisibility of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. 1.2 Establishing All Phenomena as Inexpressible By practicing in this manner, there arises the conviction that appearing objects are mind, that mind is illusory, and that the illusory is dependently arising. Phenomena that seem contradictory are thus experienced without contradiction and certainty is born. Since the exact nature of this experience cannot be put into words, it is merely labeled "inexpressible." Thus, even though its essential nature is inexpressible, the meaning of the indivisibility of luminosity and emptiness is understood through the master's pith instructions and with the help of quotations and logical reasoning. By then merging with the inconceivable expanse, the uncultivated nature is actualized. Based on the great seeing, which consists of not seeing, the true nature is realized without restrictions. Thus, liberation is gained. Even though ultimately there is nothing to awaken, on the relative level the methods of awakening are displayed by force of aspiration and compassion, bringing beings to spiritual maturity. At this point, eight examples are taught: four common examples and four uncommon ones. The former merely bring about the understanding that appearing objects are mind, that mind is illusory, and that the illusory is devoid of inherent nature. This understanding only neutralizes the poison of ignorance, which is the first of the factors to be eliminated, but not the poison of the persistent flow of thoughts, which is the root of saṃsāra. It is therefore called "the contaminated view at the time of the cause." It is classified as "view" merely in terms of being the understanding of the object. Because the pristine wisdom that arises from the latter examples, empowerment, and the two stages has the power to neutralize the poison of effort of the persistent flow of thoughts, it is called "the uncontaminated view at the time of the path." It is also called "exemplifying pristine wisdom" due to its ability to intimate the actual pristine wisdom. It is classified as "view" in terms of experiential meditative absorption. Having practiced in this way, the mind does not get lost in the profusion of deluded perceptions and whatever appears is seen as the play of pristine wisdom. Though deluded perceptions may still occur, by striving to recollect the view, they all dawn as pristine wisdom, like blocks of ice melting into water. This is the uncommon characteristic of this teaching. In brief, it is the intention of the tantras and the great accomplished masters to assert that at the conventional level appearances are mind. Since speaking of the "emptiness of the examined skandhas" by merely establishing mind as devoid of true existence would be futile, the uncommon characteristic of Unsurpassed Yoga Tantra is to introduce it as inexpressible, innate pristine wisdom. This is the intent of the statement by Mañjuśrī: "Emptiness of the investigated skandhas. . ." and so forth. This was a condensed presentation of the view and meditation as expounded by the masters of the glorious Sakya tradition. Śubham. 
